JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. 
​​​​​​​Our Mission: 
The mission of the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) is to promote clean, affordable, reliable energy and energy-related greenhouse gas emission reductions to benefit Marylanders in a just and equitable manner.  ​​Our Vision:​ ​MEA will advance impactful energy policies and programs to help achieve Maryland’s clean energy and greenhouse gas reduction goals.​​ Check out MEA's Community Solar Program Apply for available agency positions Read news related to programs established by DOE ​This website highlights grants available for Maryland businesses, nonprofits, government agencies and residents. Our agency encourages you to read about what MEA is doing in the community on our 
   
news​  page.  To learn more about Maryland's goals and energy use, and to find out what you can do to make smart energy choices, follow the links below. ​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​ 
​ The mission of the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) is to promote clean,  affordable, reliable energy and energy-related greenhouse gas emission reductions to benefit Marylanders in a just and equitable manner.  ​MEA will advance impactful energy policies and programs to help achieve Maryland's clean energy and greenhouse gas reduction goals. 
   ​
 Tell us about your experience with the Maryland Energy Administration. Click here to complete a three question customer experience survey. 
Click here to view our customer service overview.​   We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​​ General email: 
   DLinfo_MEA@maryland.gov     Call us: 1-800-72-ENERGY We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​ 
  Join the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) as we transform energy in the State of Maryland. You will have an unprecedented opportunity to work on the cutting edge of energy policy and program design. We are looking for the best and the brightest to join the team that is quickly making Maryland one of the nation’s leaders in energy.​ 
Available Positions:​ ​​​ *All positions listed will be open until filled*​​ To search or view jobs offered by other state agencies, visit the State of Maryland's Online Employment Center.​​​​​​​​​​​​ 

   
The Maryland Department of Disabilities worked with Maryland Public Television to create a brief video promoting inclusive hiring practices, click 
   here to view. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​  
   ​ Updated 10-10-23 Click on PDF below to see a larger version of this chart or 
   
here ​for our staff directory​. MEA Organization Chart Executive Team​ MEA Organization Chart We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. Please contact the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) Public Information Act (PIA) Officer regarding PIA requests and questions. MEA's PIA Officer is listed below with contact information. 

 We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ ​The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) manages the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) and explains each year how the money was put into action. SEIF money makes Maryland’s energy more affordable, cleaner and reliable through programs offered by MEA and other state agencies. These programs address: consumer energy costs, global climate change concerns, job creation, energy resilience, economic development, business retention, and energy freedom. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser.  We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​   All of MEA's grant agreements are covered by standardized General Provisions. Click the following link to review these General Provisions:    We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ ​​ 
For program updates, please email​ us​ to join our newsletter, follow us on social media ​(Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn), or bookmark this page or our​ News page. All programs are subject to available funds. NEW! Visit the Maryland Solar on Landfills and Brownfields page​ to access the 2024 Maryland Landfill Solar Assessment report. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ ​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ 


 
For program updates, please email​ us​ to join our newsletter, follow us on social media ​(Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn), or bookmark this page or our​ News page. All programs are subject to available funds. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ For program updates, please email​ us​ to join our newsletter, follow us on social media ​(Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn), or bookmark this page or our​ News page. All programs are subject to available funds. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ ​​ 
For program updates, please email​ us​ to join our newsletter, follow us on social media ​(Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn), or bookmark this page or our​ News page. All programs are subject to available funds. ​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​ ​​ 
This website contains a brief summary of some of the energy-related programs being established or expanded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the Inflation Reduction Act.   
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act​ MEA will be applying, or has already applied, for the following IIJA programs: In addition to the IIJA programs that MEA will be applying for, there are also some competitive energy-related IIJA programs that MEA partners may wish to pursue.  One such opportunity is the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Clean School Bus Program​ for 2023 which will help accelerate the replacement of existing school buses with clean and zero emission school buses.  This multiyear program​ made an award to Baltimore City Public Schools for 25 electric school buses in 2022. ​ ​​Inflation Reduction Act Links to additional information from DOE related to federal tax credits  (Disclaimer: Please note that the Maryland Energy Administration cannot provide tax advice. If you have any tax questions, please contact a licensed tax professional.)  U.S. Department of Energy  Summary of Federal Clean Energy Tax Credits for Consumers​​ Federal Inflation Reduction Act Solar Tax Credit Resources: DOE Homeowner’s Guide to the Federal Tax Credit for Solar Photovoltaics DOE Resources for Federal Solar Tax Credits for Businesses  DOE Resources for Federal Tax Credits for Solar Manufacturers​ Elective Pay (sometimes known as “direct pay”) and Transferability refers to the options that tax-exempt and governmental entities can now use to benefit from clean energy tax credits. While the Maryland Energy Administration can not provide tax advice, more information on this topic from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) can be found here​. If you are interested in getting updates on these new federal IIJA or IRA programs, as well as other MEA energy programs, please follow MEA on social media at Facebook | Twitter | LinkedIn. If there are additional questions related to federal programs not addressed above, these Inquiries can be directed to federal.mea@maryland.gov.  ​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​ ​​ 

As Maryland’s state energy office, the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) will be the applicant for two of the residential-focused IRA rebate programs - the HOMES Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program and the High-Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program.​ MEA understands of the interest in these programs, and looks forward to making the rebate programs available to the public as soon as possible. Update: MEA is pleased to announce that Maryland’s Section 50121: HOMES Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program and Section 50122: High-Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program Early Administrative Funds application were approved by DOE in early July 2024.  MEA will use Early Administrative Funds funds for project design and development of the full HOMES Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program and the High-Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program. Early admin funds will enable MEA to hire staff to work on the two IRA rebate programs.   MEA is in an advanced stage of recruiting these staff members, who will ultimately oversee the implementation of the full program once approved.   
On January 5, 2024, MEA submitted the inital Early Administrative Funds applications to DOE. After several rounds of DOE feedback, MEA submitted the updated versions of  the Early Administrative applications on April 19, 2024. and is currently working to update the applications based on DOE feedback. On January 4, 2024, MEA submitted a Report on the Status of Implementation of Residential-focused Rebate Programs Through Federal Stimulus Funding​​, as required by the Joint Chairmen’s Report of the 2023 Session​. ​ 

If you are interested in getting updates on these new federal programs from MEA, as well as other MEA energy programs, please follow MEA on social media at Facebook | X, formerly known as Twitter | LinkedIn.  

Will the rebate incentives be available retroactively?  
Additional Information from DOE: Please note that the Maryland Energy Administration cannot provide tax advice.  If you have any tax questions, please contact  a licensed tax professional.  ​ If there are additional questions related to the IRA rebates not addressed above, these inquiries can be directed to federal.mea@maryland.gov.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​ ​Chapter 98 (Ch.98) of the 2023 Laws of Maryland​ (HB550) modified the allowable uses of compliance fees paid under § 7–705(b) and § 7–705(b)(2)(i)(2) of the ​​​Public Utilities Article. These compliance fees may now only be used to make loans and grants to support the creation of new Tier 1 renewable energy sources (§ 7-705(b)) and new solar  energy sources (§ 7-705(b)(2)(i)(2)), in the State that are owned by or directly benefit:  low-to-moderate income communities located in a census tract with a median income at or below 80% of the median income from the State; or, overburdened or underserved communities, as defined § 1–701 of the Environmental Article.  Please note that the compliance fees paid under § 7–705(b) and § 7–705(b)(2)(i)(2) of the Public Utilities Article are being used to fund specific Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) energy programs in fiscal year 2024. A project being located in a qualifying census tract does not automatically qualify the project to receive a loan or grant.  For a particular project to be eligible for § 7–705(b) or § 7–705(b)(2)(i)(2) funding, each project must conform to all applicable program requirements outlined in the respective program’s funding opportunity announcement, and be selected for an award by MEA.    Map of Low-to-Moderate Income, Overburdened, and Underserved Communities meeting the requirements of Ch. 98/HB550.   As defined by Ch.98/HB550, blue areas meet the definition of an underserved community, orange areas meet the definition of an overburdened community, and green areas meet the definition of a low-to-moderate income community.  For fiscal year 2024, the Maryland Energy Administration has identified this list of Ch.98/HB550 eligible census tracts, with low-to-moderate income communities determined using U.S. Census Data, and overburdened and underserved communities identified through the Maryland Department of the Environment’s EJ Screening Tool.  A searchable Excel spreadsheet of Ch.98/HB550 census tracts eligible for funding generated by alternative compliance payments, or solar alternative compliance payments,  from Maryland’s Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) can be found here.  Determining a census tract: To determine the census tract for a particular address, the U.S. Census Bureau has developed a Census Geocoder tool. The tool will identify the census tract based on street address.    After inputting the address, scroll down to the section entitled “Census Tracts” and find either the “GeoID” number or the “Name” of the census tract.   Example: MEA’s office location at 1800 Washington Blvd, Baltimore, MD, 21230 is in GeoID #24510210200, also known as Baltimore City census tract #2102.    The GeoID and Census Tract Name information from the Census Geocoder tool can then be cross-referenced with the list of eligible census tracts (PDF version and searchable Excel file).   Please note:  While the GeoID number is a unique number, several counties can have the same census tract number.  When checking HB550 eligibility using census tract number, the census tract number and the name of the county must always be looked at in tandem.  There is also a Census map tool that can be used to help visualize the boundaries of each census tract. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ 

     
Access to affordable capital remains a significant hurdle for many Maryland homeowners, businesses, non-profit organizations, and local governments interested in energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. MEA’s Energy Finance Initiative is a collection of programs, financing tools, and other resources designed to help fill the funding needs of clean energy projects. If you are interested in becoming a financing partner for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects, please check back often for new programs in which you may be able to participate or contact 
   DLinfo_MEA@maryland.gov​​. Projects to reduce energy use or generate electricity from renewable sources often pay for themselves through the savings from reduced utility bills. Despite the savings potential, homeowners, businesses, and non-profit organizations can be challenged to find the money for the up-front costs of such projects. MEA’s financing programs are designed to overcome this hurdle by helping customers access low-cost capital for energy improvements. Using a $600,000 Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan from MEA, one Baltimore office building was able to save $300,000 a year on energy costs​ by replacing an aging HVAC system along with lighting and other retrofits. 
Read this and other MEA success stories to learn more.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​   EmPOWER programs are managed by the following companies: Baltimore Gas and Electric Company (BGE), Potomac Edison Company (PE), Delmarva Power & Light (Delmarva), Potomac Electric Power Company (PEPCO), Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative, Inc. (SMECO), and Washington Gas Light Company (WGL), with the exception of programs for low-income customers, which the Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) administers. Programs include lighting and appliance rebates for homeowners, Home Performance with ENERGY STAR (including home energy assessments and 50% rebates for energy improvements like insulation and air sealing), commercial lighting rebates, and energy efficiency services for industrial facilities. If you are a residential, commercial, or industrial customer, you can find incentives offered by your utility using the links below.​  
Potomac Edison's Energy Saving Programs While every home is different, the chart below provides a list of energy savings measures that residents can use to achieve significant energy savings. When implemented, these measures can help Marylanders significantly reduce electricity consumption. Click here for detailed explanations of each energy conservation measure We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​ Wondering where to charge your electric vehicle? Want to know the difference between a kilowatt and a kilowatt-hour? Not sure how to choose your own electricity provider? Find the answers to these questions and more in the Maryland Energy Administration's Energy 101. Energy 101 is an energy guide for Maryland. Energy 101 encourages you to explore Energy Basics, browse Consumer Choices, and delve into Energy Policy. There are graphics, links to additional energy information, and source material that provides even more detail on the topics you've learned about here. If you have additional questions, please take a look around the rest of the MEA website, or email us directly at 
   DLinfo_MEA@maryland.gov. A watt is the basic unit of measurement for electricity in an instant. To measure electricity in larger quantities, the following units of measurements are often referenced: The kilowatt-hour is a unit of electricity (kW) that is delivered over time.  The kilowatt hour (kWh) is most commonly known as a billing unit for energy delivered to you by your electricity provider, over the course of your billing cycle.  For example, a heater rated at 1 kilowatt operating for two hours uses two kilowatt-hours of energy.  Using a 60 watt light bulb for one thousand hours consumes 60 kilowatt-hours of electricity. Similarly, one megawatt-hour is 1,000 kilowatts used or delivered in an hour. Megawatt-hours are typically used to describe the energy delivered by a power plant over time. For example, the Calvert Cliffs power plant, when operating at full capacity for one hour, produces 1,735 MWh of electricity that can be used in Maryland.​ In 2008, Marylanders used 63.3 million MWh (or 63.3 billion kWh) of electricity. In general, as more people live and work in Maryland, and as incomes grow, they collectively use more electricity. Marylanders use energy for most of their daily activities. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) says that all energy consumption (electricity, gasoline, natural gas, fuel oil, and propane) in Maryland totaled 1,447 trillion British thermal units (Btus) in 2008, the equivalent of 436 billion kWh. This is approximately 1.5% of all energy consumed in the United States. In Maryland, energy is consumed by four sectors. Transportation consumes the highest share of energy in Maryland, accounting for 31% of the State’s energy use. The commercial sector accounts for 29% of use, residential accounts for 28%, and industrial accounts for 12%.   Of all energy consumed in the United States, about 20% is expended on the heating and cooling, lighting, and appliances in homes. Televisions are increasingly becoming a significant part of the energy use in homes. The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimates that energy consumed through television use – approximately 5.3% of residential electricity use in 2006 - will grow to nearly 7.2% by 2030, making this appliance the most energy consuming product in the home. With accessory equipment such as cable boxes and DVD players, television-related energy use increases to around 10% in homes. This increase comes from: people watching more hours of TV; increased size of the average television screen (people have bigger TVs); and the fact that high-definition digital televisions use more energy than their analog predecessors. In fact, some large flat screen televisions draw as much power as a common refrigerator. Nearly 70% of Maryland’s coal-fired electric generation is produced by power plants that are at least 30 years old.  Of these plants, 22% have been operating for more than 50 years, representing about 12% of the state’s total generation. These plants are so old that when they were built, JFK was president and The Beatles had just played their first show. Of the 81 electric generating plants in Maryland, 31 have been operating for less than 30 years, 11 have been operating between 30-40 years, 21 have been operating 40-50 years, and 18 have been operating for more than 50 years. As Maryland’s medium- and long-term demand increases, new power needs to be developed from a diverse energy portfolio that is clean, renewable, and affordable. To attain those goals, we'll need to make smart, front-end decisions.​ Like driving on highways, electricity can only move around the state on a network of power lines (“transmission” and “distribution”). And, like driving, traffic jams occur from time to time. To reduce electricity congestion and electricity availability, Maryland is considering a number of new transmission projects (the equivalent of adding another lane to a highway). Three of these projects that would impact Maryland are: the Trans Allegheny Interstate Line (TrAIL); the Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline (PATH); and the Mid-Atlantic Power Pathway (MAPP). The Mid-Atlantic region has been designated as a National Interest Electric Transmission Corridor (NIETC). This designation means that additional transmission capacity is so critical that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), under limited conditions, may issue permits for regional transmission line projects that are deemed to be of national interest. In addition to centralized generating stations such as those listed in the question, “Where are power pla​nts located in Maryland?”, distributed generation is becoming more widespread. Distributed generation generally refers to consumers creating their own electricity at or near the point of consumption, avoiding transmission and distribution of the energy and avoiding purchasing electricity from the  utility. This power is generally used to satisfy on-site electricity needs, such as for a house or a small office building. Distributed generation technologies include combustion engines, small wind, solar, small hydroelectric, and fuel cells. They can be used to take the place of electricity from the grid during times of peak demand or to reduce reliance on a local utility. Electricity moves from the power plant to your home through a series of high-voltage power lines called the “electric grid.” “Electric generation” refers to the power plants creating the electricity from resources such as coal, wind, and the sun. “Electric distribution” refers to the power lines connecting your home to the power plant. Detailed coordination and planning of the transmission system is critical to maintaining electricity reliability and the ability to provide needed power supplies at reasonable prices. The map below shows the extent of Maryland’s existing transmission network. The further the electricity must travel, the higher the voltage of the transmission line. As the power reaches your house, the electric companies lower the voltage to a “distribution” level, to make the power usable in your television, computer, and other items needing electricity. In this map, “kV” means “kilovolt” or 1000 volts of electricity. A volt is a unit of measurement analogous to the measurement of the pressure difference which creates water flow – the voltage, or “pressure difference,” determines how quickly electrons will travel through the circuit. The higher the voltage, the faster the electricity can move and the more efficiently it will move between points. But electricity moving at higher speeds is not usable for items like televisions, computers, and kitchen appliances. That’s why high voltage transmission lines send electricity large distances, and low voltage lines are used to deliver power to your house.   Source: Maryland Power Plants and the Environment: A review of the impacts of power plants and transmission lines on Maryland’s natural resources (CEIR-15) PJM controls and coordinates the delivery of power throughout the region. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) regulates PJM, which determines the flow of power (“dispatching”) across the District of Columbia and all or parts of 13 states: Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan. PJM consolidates transmission needs into a single coordinated plan to ensure everyone has access to power. PJM creates 5-year plans to undertake transmission system upgrades, as well as a 15-year plan for upgrades to high-voltage circuits (i.e., 230 kV and above). The following map illustrates proposed transmission system upgrades in Maryland.   Source: Maryland Power Plants and the Environment: A review of the impacts of power plants and transmission lines on Maryland’s natural resources (CEIR-15) Generation costs are generally dependent upon how much it costs an operator to run the power plant. The main areas of generation cost include the fuel, maintenance, and the cost to pay for construction of the plant itself. In the case of renewable fuel resources, the cost of fuel is zero, and this factor is balanced with the capital cost of construction. Transmission and distribution congestion, like a traffic jam along the highway, describes a situation in which lower cost power cannot reach its intended market because the transmission system is not able to carry the electricity. Typically occurring during periods of high demand (like hot summers when people are using their air conditioners), congestion results from a constraint along the transmission line. This transmission congestion can have a significant impact on location-specific prices of electricity in the wholesale (bulk) markets. Generators selling electricity in a zone with transmission congestion may be able to obtain higher prices than a generator with comparable operating costs located in a zone that is not subject to transmission congestion. Price differentials within the PJM regions are mainly due to congestion between the Western Region (Ohio), where abundant low-cost generation is located, and the Mid-Atlantic Region (Maryland), where the population is higher (requiring more electricity) and generation is comparatively less. PJM estimates that congestion added approximately $57.7 million in costs for BGE in 2007 and $66.6 million for Delmarva Power in that same year. To reduce congestion and improve system reliability (reduce blackouts and loss of power), a number of new transmission projects are being proposed, three of which would affect Maryland: the Trans Atlantic Interstate Line (TrAIL), the Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline (PATH), and the Mid-Atlantic Power Pathway (MAPP). These projects are discussed in more detail in the question "How does electricity reach my home?". The electricity industry is separated into three independent businesses: 1) generation and supply (creating the electricity), 2) transmission (moving the electricity long distances, and 3) distribution (delivering the electricity to your house). Customers are billed for each of the three separate functions, although most customers just receive one consolidated electric bill. For a more comprehensive breakdown of your bill, visit your power company’s website to see how you pay for each of these pieces: Of all energy consumed in the United States, about 20% is expended on the heating and cooling, lighting, and appliances in homes. You can easily reduce your electric bill with simple changes to your energy use. To discover easy ways to reduce your electric bill, read MEA’s Residential Energy Saving Tips and learn 15 things that will empower you to save money. For example, most energy used in your house is for heating and cooling. An easy way to save money is to make your home more energy efficient. Install efficient windows and weather stripping, and lower your thermostat in the winter and raise it in the summer – these are all easy ways to save money by using less electricity for heating and cooling. By conducting a home energy assessment, you can find all the places where your home can be more energy efficient. For information about conducting a home energy assessment, read MEA’s Energy Assessment suggestions or visit the Maryland Home Performance with ENERGY STAR website.​ In these difficult economic times, an increasing number of Marylanders have found they need help with their utility bills. Whether it is the right information or financial assistance, there are resources available to you. As a low-income customer, you may qualify for assistance from the Maryland Energy Assistance Program (MEAP) and the Electric Universal Service Program (EUSP) for your utility bills. Visit the Maryland Office of the People’s Counsel website for consumer rights fact sheets, energy assistance applications, weatherization assistance program information and more. You can also call People’s Counsel at 1-800-207-4055. Another resource is the Maryland Department of Human Resources’ Maryland Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) at or 1-800-352-1446. ​ Yes. Since the deregulation of the energy market in Maryland in 1999, Maryland residents have been able to  choose who provides their gas and electricity. You may choose to buy electricity or gas from your local utility (like BGE or Pepco) or from an alternative energy supplier. A gas or electricity supplier may offer lower prices than your local utility, or may offer you options for electricity from renewable energy, such as wind or solar energy. All gas and electricity suppliers must be approved by the Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC) and comply with the PSC’s rules on marketing, solicitation, contracting, and all Maryland consumer protection laws. Energy suppliers compete with your local utility to sell you electricity and/or natural gas. Suppliers sell directly to consumers, using the local utility’s distribution system (the power lines or natural gas pipes). You pay the local utility for the delivery service, and the supplier for the electricity or gas. Most often you will receive only one bill from the utility listing the prices of the distribution and generation separately. You do not have to choose a new supplier. If you do not, then by default you will receive your electricity or gas supply from your local utility. If you do choose an energy supplier, the following still applies: Websites and direct mail information from energy companies do not always make clear whether they are energy suppliers, energy brokers (a company that sells and trades energy in the wholesale marketplace but not directly to you as a user), or aggregators (a broker that acts on behalf of a group of customers, or multiple customers such as a homeowners association). There are important differences and you will always need to have a contract with an energy supplier if you do not purchase your electric or gas from your local utility. See the Maryland Office of the People’s Counsel (OPC) for a detailed description: What are Energy Suppliers, Brokers, Aggregators? The OPC has a guide on Contracting for Electricity and Natural Gas Supply and pricing information for Electric Suppliers and Natural Gas Suppliers. It may be helpful to review the Guide and OPC’s price comparison information, and check with the Maryland PSC about licensed suppliers, before you make any decisions on contracting with a supplier.​ Yes. Some energy suppliers specialize in renewable energy contracts, and some offer a blend of renewable and non-renewable energy sources, depending on your needs. The OPC has a guide on Contracting for Electricity and Natural Gas Supply and pricing information for Electric Suppliers and Natural Gas Suppliers. It may be helpful to review the Guide and OPC’s price comparison information, and check with the Maryland PSC about licensed suppliers, before you make any decisions on contracting with a supplier.​ Yes. You can generate renewable energy at your home by installing energy generating equipment like solar cells, small wind turbines, and geothermal technology. Businesses, government entities and industrial companies can also generate their own renewable energy.​ Yes. To encourage the growth of renewable energy in Maryland, the Maryland Energy Administration offers grants towards the purchase and installation of wind, solar, and geothermal systems. For a list of available grants, visit the MEA residential, business, state & local, or transportation webpages. Some examples of residential grants offered by MEA include: The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) website is a great resource for Maryland residents to find information and incentives that increase energy efficiency and renewable energy production across the State. The website is also an informational tool for non-Maryland residents to discover ways to make improvements on their own and join Maryland as it continues to lead by example on energy programs and goals. You can also contact MEA by email at DLinfo_MEA@maryland.gov​ or by phone at 410-260-7655 or 800-72-ENERGY. Another resource is DSIREUSA.org. DSIRE is a comprehensive source of information on state, local, utility and federal incentives and policies that promote renewable energy and energy efficiency. DSIRE was established in 1995 and is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy.​ Information on how to apply to MEA’s Clean Energy Grant Program is located on our website based on the consumer category: To apply for a Clean Energy Grant, you or your selected contractor should fill out an application form and the supporting documents. These forms are sent to MEA as part of a complete application package. MEA reviews each application for completeness and accuracy. Incomplete or incorrect applications will be returned to you for correction. It is necessary that all requested information is supplied to avoid delays. MEA will notify you after we receive your completed application. If there is a waiting list, your application will be automatically placed on the waiting list in the order it was approved. Once it is your turn to receive grant funds, you will receive a Grant Commitment Letter. This letter details the award information and effectively reserves your funding. Once you receive the Grant Commitment Letter, you can then install your project. After installation, you and your installer should send in the completion package, which consists of the Completion Certificate and the requested items of supporting documentation. MEA will review the completion package for completeness and accuracy. If any information is missing or incorrect, the package will be returned without being processed. When the application is deemed complete, the information is sent to the Governor’s Finance Office to process payment to the applicant.​ The number of contractors specializing in residential renewable energy system installations has grown to more than 300 in Maryland. MEA does not endorse or approve any specific contractors, but there are resources and associations you can use to find local contractors to install your renewable energy system. After MEA has received and accepted all required final grant documentation based on an installed system, grant payment is typically processed in 6-8 weeks. The entire process includes the initial application and review period, the length of which depends on the length of the waitlist. Upon application approval, the applicant has 180 days to finish the installation and submit to MEA all required documentation to receive the grant, which is typically processed in 6-8 weeks. You can find the instructions for application on the Residential Clean Energy Rebate Program​​ web page.​ Yes. Local ordinances define what structures can be installed on properties. Visit the MEA website to find a list of Counties with Wind Ordinances. If you are an incorporated municipality, please check with your local planning and zoning office.​ On the MEA transportation webpage, you will find information about alternative fuel and electric vehicles in Maryland. Once there, it’s easy to find lists of biofuel fueling stations, ethanol (E85) fueling stations, and natural gas fueling (CNG) stations. In addition, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) maintains an interactive map giving information and directions to biodiesel (B20 and above), compressed natural gas, electric, ethanol, hydrogen, liquefied natural gas (LNG) and liquefied petroleum gas (propane) fueling stations. To view the map, visit DOE’s Alternative Fuels & Advanced Vehicles Data Center.​ The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) helps provide Marylanders with reliable, affordable clean energy. MEA provides funding and resources that help Marylanders save money while making smart energy-saving choices. We help Maryland save money and energy by assisting residents, businesses, and State and local governments reduce their statewide electricity demand. By promoting, encouraging and financially supporting the use of renewable energy and energy efficiency activities, we help decrease the amount of electricity that residents pay for, and increase the amount of clean, renewable energy deployed throughout the state. MEA also helps citizens, businesses, and governmental entities include renewable energy sources into homes and businesses across the State. The State’s goal is to generate 25% of its energy from clean, renewable sources like wind and solar, by 2020 is being realized throughout Maryland. Since 2006, the amount of solar PV systems installed in Maryland has increased 140 times over. MEA programs and grants help offset the upfront cost of installing solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, and other renewable energy systems. Under the EmPOWER Maryland initiative, the State of Maryland set a goal to reduce energy use by 15% by the year 2015. Enacted in 2008, EmPOWER Maryland created energy efficiency programs that are offered through the state’s five largest electric utilities. The program helps homeowners and businesses save energy, partly by offering incentives and technical assistance for adding insulation, sealing air leaks, and installing more efficient appliances. It also facilitates efficient commercial lighting and other improvements at industrial facilities. The majority of the EmPOWER Maryland programs offered previously will continue beyond 2015, and the utilities and stakeholders are currently investigating new program offerings. As part of their EmPOWER Maryland portfolios, Maryland’s five largest electric utilities offer many programs to save your home or business energy and money. Programs include lighting and appliance rebates, HVAC, Home Performance with Energy Star, Energy Star New Homes, combined heat and power, and other efficiency services and/or measures for homes, businesses and industrial facilities. The Maryland Energy Administration encourages residents to adopt the combination of energy savings measures that are most appropriate for their homes. In many cases, these measures do not require a large financial investment, and grants, rebates, and tax credits are available. For more information on how to save money at your home, see  “What can I do to reduce my monthly electricity bill?” For more information, visit the MEA EmPower Maryland page. As of 2010, there were more than 600 renewable energy facilities in Maryland supplying more than 700 MW of electricity. This represents approximately 5% of Maryland’s electricity coming from renewable sources. This is up from 24 facilities in 2006. (Source: Power Plant Research Project, 2010 Inventory of Renewable Energy Generators Eligible for the Maryland Renewable Portfolio Standard.) The effort to increase the use of clean renewable energy for the state creates green jobs and encourages a growing economy. Maryland currently offers incentives for private citizens, businesses, and industries to take advantage of solar, wind, biomass, landfill methane, geothermal, ocean, fuel cell, and hydropower resources. They include: To further encourage renewable energy generation in Maryland, in 2008 Maryland enacted Renewable Portfolio Standard legislation, requiring Maryland electric suppliers to provide their customers with a gradually increasing portion of their electricity from renewable energy. This obligation is met through “Renewable Energy Credits,” or RECs (the tool that represents 1 MWh of renewable energy produced, like a stock certificate representing one share of stock in a company), or through alternative compliance payments (ACPs) credited into the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) to support renewable energy projects in Maryland. Utilities must pay the ACP if they do not meet the renewable energy goals required by state law. In 2010, the State of Maryland chose to lead by example in the execution of its renewable energy policy. Together, MEA, the Maryland Department of General Services, and the University of Maryland collectively launched the Generating Clean Horizons initiative to increase the amount of installed clean energy in Maryland. In Generating Clean Horizons, Maryland committed to buy a certain amount of its own electricity needs at state facilities from renewable sources to meet the needs of state offices. Maryland government facilities purchase clean energy generated in Maryland at competitive prices, offered through contracts by private industry. This arrangement offers renewable energy developers the certainty needed to finance these new projects, which directly results in new jobs and tax revenue for all of Maryland.​ Maryland’s clean energy goal is to generate 20% of its electricity from clean, renewable sources by 2022. In 2008, Maryland put its clean energy goals into law through the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS). There are several ways the State can achieve this goal. This includes generating at least 2% of its electricity directly from solar energy. Maryland also looks to other renewable energy sources as well, including existing biomass resources (such as forestry waste, agricultural crops, municipal waste, and poultry litter) and the development of onshore wind projects. In 2010, the State of Maryland chose to lead by example in the execution of its renewable energy policy. Together, MEA, the Maryland Department of General Services, and the University of Maryland collectively launched the Generating Clean Horizons initiative to increase the amount of installed clean energy in Maryland. In Generating Clean Horizons, Maryland committed to buy a certain amount of its own electricity needs at state facilities from renewable sources to meet the needs of state offices. Maryland government facilities purchase clean energy generated in Maryland at competitive prices, offered through contracts by private industry. This arrangement offers renewable energy developers the certainty needed to finance these new projects, which directly results in new jobs and tax revenue for all of Maryland.  The Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) is a policy goal that specifies that 20% of the electricity sold in Maryland must come from renewable resources by the year 2022. At least 2% of the electricity must come from solar resources that are located in Maryland. The remaining 18% can come from other renewable technologies such as wind, biomass, landfill gas, anaerobic digestion, and other approved technologies located in the wider PJM region. Annual RPS requirements increase each year until the 20% requirement is reached in 2022. The RPS is designed to provide a market incentive encouraging new renewable energy construction. RPS compliance is provided through a mechanism of Renewable Energy Credits (RECs). RECs represent 1,000 kWh of renewable energy generation. Each energy supplier serving Maryland consumers must purchase enough RECs to satisfy their RPS requirement. If an energy supplier does not purchase enough RECs, they must pay a penalty called an Alternative Compliance Payment. The penalty is routed back to MEA to use for additional clean energy grants. The RPS is important as it encourages the generation of clean, non-polluting energy. It also makes Maryland’s electric supply more dependable because the resources are distributed. This eases congestion on the electricity distribution network and can increase the grid’s reliability in extreme weather conditions. For more about the distribution of electricity, see the question, "How does electricity reach my home?" For more information on the RPS, visit the Public Service Commission’s Annual RPS Reports.​ There is a fundamental difference in how renewable energy systems produce electricity and how homeowners consume it. Solar panels don’t produce electricity at night, and wind systems produce the most electricity during the winter months. Because homeowners don’t consume electricity in the same patterns, it is unlikely that the system production and homeowner consumption will exactly match what is produced at a particular time. Net metering allows a customer with their own distributed generation renewable energy system to offset their energy production against their energy consumption over a period of time (typically a year). When net metering is used, utilities must install electric meters that can move in two directions. Typically, your meter only spins in one direction, forward, to reflect your home’s use of electricity. In net metering, the meter spins forward when you are using more energy than your system is producing (such as at night), and spins backwards when producing more electricity than you are using (such as during cool spring days or when no one is home). The local utility allows the generation and consumption to “net” against each other for a defined period, and the customer only pays for the net amount used. For example, if over the course of a month a homeowner consumes 1,000 kWh, and their renewable energy system produces 800 kWh, they will only be billed for the 200 kWh difference. If the homeowner produces more energy than they use, they can roll the kWh credit forward for up to 12 months to offset future consumption. More information on net metering can be found on your local utility’s website. Search for the term "Net Meter" or "Net Metering."​ MEA’s clean energy grant programs are funded through several different sources, including the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF), and from Alternative Compliance Payments contributed by electricity generators that do not meet the RPS.​ Maryland Energy Administration. Maryland Energy Outlook, Jan. 2010. Retrieved Dec. 2010 from http://www.energy.state.md.us/documents/MEOFINALREPORTJAN2010.pdf Maryland Office of the People’s Counsel. Consumer Corner. Retrieved Nov. 2010 from http://www.opc.state.md.us/opc/ConsumerCorner.aspx Maryland Power Plant Research Program. Electricity in Maryland – Fact Book 2008. Retrieved Nov. 2010 from http://esm.versar.com/pprp/factbook/factbook.htm Maryland Power Plant Research Program. Maryland Power Plants and the Environment: A review of the impacts of power plants and transmission lines on Maryland’s natural resources (CEIR-15). https://dnr.maryland.gov/pprp/Documents/CEIR-19-Full%20Document.pdf​​ U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Maryland State Energy Profile. Retrieved from http://www.eia.doe.gov/state/state-energy-profiles.cfm?sid=MD.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ Appliance standards specify the minimum energy and/or water efficiency levels of specific residential and commercial products to maintain appliance performance and reduce utility bill costs.  On May 29, 2022, House Bill 772 was enacted as Chapter 564 of the Acts of the Maryland General Assembly of 2022. The legislation establishes minimum energy efficiency standards for eleven new products sold or installed in Maryland and establishes testing, certification, inspection, and enforcement procedures for ensuring compliance with established standards.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ ​​Large state procurements are posted publicly to the State of Maryland’s eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) website, which can be accessed here. As a Maryland state agency, the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) will post large procurements on eMMA.  MEA also partners with its fellow state agency, the Maryland Environmental Service (MES), on some procurements; in this situation, MES will post the procurement on eMMA as well as on the MES Bonfire procurement website.  Getting Started with eMMA We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ ​The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) manages the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) and explains each year how the money was put into action. SEIF money makes Maryland’s energy more affordable, cleaner and reliable through programs offered by MEA and other state agencies. These programs address: consumer energy costs, global climate change concerns, job creation, energy resilience, economic development, business retention, and energy freedom. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ 

 We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ Thank you for visiting the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) website. MEA works to maximize energy efficiency while promoting economic development, reducing reliance on foreign energy supplies, and improving the environment. 410-537-4000 or 1-800-72-ENERGY  410-537-4096 DLInfo_MEA@maryland.gov Maryland Energy Administration1800 Washington Blvd., Suite 755
Baltimore, MD 21230 Map directions using Google Maps. Contact a staff member: View the staff d​irectory.​​​ 
Coming to Montgomery Park From the North​​Take I-95 South.Go through the Fort McHenry Tunnel.Exit at Exit 53 (I-395/Martin Luther King Boulevard).Follow signs to Martin Luther King Boulevard to the right.Get into the left lane after exiting.At the first traffic light, make a left onto Washington Boulevard.Follow Washington Boulevard for approximately one mile.Cross over Monroe Street.Make a right into the Red parking lot.  Take I-95 South. Go through the Fort McHenry Tunnel. Exit at Exit 50A-B (Caton Avenue/Washington Boulevard). Stay in the left lane of the exit following signs to Washington Boulevard. Get in the left lane on Patapsco Avenue. At the third traffic light, make a left onto Washington Boulevard. Stay on Washington Boulevard for approximately 1.5 miles. Turn left onto the Red parking lot. Coming to Montgomery Park From the North take I-95 South. Go through the Fort McHenry Tunnel. Exit at Exit 52 (Baltimore/Washington Parkway/BWI Airport/295S). After exiting, stay in right lane and bear off right to the Westport Field Office. At the first traffic light after exiting, make a left onto Annapolis Road. Continue on Annapolis Road until it dead-ends into Russell Street.  Merge right. Stay in right hand lane and turn right at Haines Street just past the Amoco station then make a left onto Warner Street then a left onto Bayard Street.  Continue on Bayard Street to Washington Boulevard and make a left.  The building will be on your right at Monroe Street. 
Coming to Montgomery Park From Annapolis Head northwest on Rowe Blvd. Merge onto US-50 West. In two miles on US-50 West, Use the right 2 lanes to take EXIT 21 I-97 North towards Baltimore.While on I-97 North, Take EXIT 17 I-695 West to Baltimore. While on I-695 West, Take EXIT 11A to merge onto I-95 North toward Baltimore. While on I-95 North, Take EXIT 51 for Washington Boulevard North. Turn Left onto Washington Blvd. Red Lot Destination will be on your left. 
Coming to Montgomery Park From the South Take I-95 North. Exit at Exit 51 (Washington Boulevard). At bottom of the Exit ramp, make a left onto Washington Boulevard. Turn left onto the Red parking lot. Take I-95 North. Exit at Exit 50A-B (Caton Avenue/Washington Boulevard). Bear to the right off the Exit ramp. Get in the left lane on Patapsco Avenue. At the third traffic light, make a left onto Washington Boulevard. Stay on Washington Boulevard for approximately 1.5 miles. Turn left onto the Red parking lot. 
By MTA Local Bus Two MTA bus lines run by Montgomery Park: Route 36 South and Route 51.  The #36 line has over 60 trips daily in each direction. Southbound begins in the northern part of Baltimore City at Northern Parkway and York Avenue providing service from locations including Cedarcroft, Woodbourne, Pen-Lucy, Ednor Gardens, Homestead, and Downtown. Northbound service begins at Riverview and passes through Landsdowne before coming up Washington Boulevard. Service is provided approximately every 15 minutes. The earliest trip arrives at Montgomery Park around 4:30 a.m. and the last departure is well after 1:00 a.m.Route 51 runs from the Rodgers Avenue metro stop to Cherry Hill.​​​​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ ​​​ ​For more information regarding these efforts and to reach out to our committee members, please email dei.mea@maryland.gov. ​Committee Members: Garry Aime Brandon Bowser Abbi Antonini Gary Malveaux Sondra McLemore David A. Shapiro Landon Fahrig​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​ Paul G. Pinsky, Director We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ ​ Program Description: The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) proudly presents the FY2025 Higher Education Clean Energy Grant Program, aimed at Maryland's Institutions of Higher Education (i.e., accredited two and four year colleges and universities). This competitive - statewide program is designed to foster a holistic approach to sustainability by supporting the adoption of on-site renewable energy technologies, the integration of strategic energy planning into operations and academic curricula, and the advancement of workforce development in the renewable energy sector.  We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​ ​​ **Decarbonizing Public Schools Program - Fiscal Year 2025** MEA is excited to announce that the Decarbonizing Public Schools Program will return for Fiscal Year 2025! MEA is in the final stages of preparing the program documents, including the Funding Opportunity Announcement(s). Stay tuned for the official launch in the coming weeks. FY24 Awardees: ​FY24 School Decarb Award List ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Follow MEA on social media for updates: Facebook | Twitter | LinkedIn ​​​​ ​Tell us about your experience with the Maryland Energy Administration. Click here to complete a three-question customer experience survey. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​ ​​Program Description: The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) is interested in receiving proposals that fall outside the range of its other ENERGY programs.  ​The OPEN Energy Program (OPEN Energy) provides an avenue for the agency to consider these proposals for funding.  Please see the Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA) below for details.​ Type of Program: Non-competitive Grant. Program Application Deadline: Applications will be accepted, and eligible proposals will be considered, throughout the fiscal year as long as funds are available. However, applicants are strongly encouraged to submit applications no later than January 31, 2024,, for best chance of consideration.   Anticipated Program Budget: A minimum of $2,000,000 for energy efficiency related activities and$1,500,000 for renewable energy, transportation, climate change mitigation, and resiliency projects is expected to be available. ​ Program Documents:  For more information regarding the OPEN Energy Gr​a​nt Program, contact Garry Aime, the MEA program manager, by email at garry.aime@maryland.gov or by phone at 443-306-8149.Follow MEA on social media for updates: Facebook I Twitter I Linkedin Tell us about your experience with the Maryland Energy Administration. Click here to complete a three question customer experience survey. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​ 


 

 Area of Interest Description​​ Program Documents Market Entry Report and Planning Funds are provided under AOI 1 to help offset the costs of retaining a consultant to develop a market entry plan for eligible businesses looking to enter the offshore wind industry. These activities include helping the business determine 1) the offshore wind business opportunities present 2) targeted level of sales, 3) the specific product or service for export, 4) the target market, 5) major milestones and a timeline for completion, and 6) a budget and available resources for achieving these goals.  See the AOI 1 FOA for full details and requirements. Funding Announcement FY24 SCIP Market Entry AOI 1 ​Extended Deadline Application Portal https://form.jotform.com/232828524692161 Capital Expenditures Funds are provided under AOI 2 to help offset the capital expenditures needed for the organization to enter the offshore wind industry as detailed in their Market Entry Report. Eligible expenses include: 1. Relocation costs, new construction of real property, and renovations to existing real property; and, 2. Purchase and installation of equipment at a new or existing real property(s). See AOI 2 FOA for full details and requirements. Funding Announcement FY24 SCIP AOI 2 CapEx Extended Deadline Application Portal https://form.jotform.com/232835354178159 Industry Events  Funds are provided under AOI 3 to help offset the costs associated with attending offshore wind industry events. Eligible applicants may receive a one time reimbursement of up to $5,000 for attending eligible industry events.  See AOI 3 FOA for full details and requirements. Funding Announcement FY24 SCIP AOI 3 Industry Events FOA Extended Deadline Application Portal https://form.jotform.com/232883376947170 Area of Interest​ Funding Availability Market Entry Report and Planning $ 250,000 Capital Expenditures $ 1,000,000 Industry Events  $250,000 
Tell us about your experience with the Maryland Energy Administration. Click here to complete a three question customer experience survey.​  We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​   The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) is excited to announce the Maryland Offshore Wind Workforce Training and Education Program (the Program) for Fiscal Year 2024. The Program provides grant funding on a competitive basis to support new or existing workforce training centers and academic institutions to expand their capabilities to support the State’s offshore wind workforce training and education efforts.   ​Applications will be accepted until March ​1, 2024 at 5:00 PM EST. This Program offers both competitive and noncompetitive funding opportunities.  Area of Interest Description Program Documents Industry Education Funds are provided under AOI 1 to help offset the capital and operating expenditures associated with developing or expanding and implementing offshore wind education programs. Funds under this AOI are intended to expand the general public’s knowledge and understanding of offshore wind energy and educate individuals on how to get involved in offshore wind as a career. Education projects under this AOI may be for any education level. See FOA 1 for full AOI details and requirements. Funding Announcement FY24 Industry Education FOA AOI 1 Extended Deadline Application Portal https://form.jotform.com/232818123908155 Workforce Training Funds are provided under AOI 2 to help offset the capital and operating expenditures associated with developing or expanding and implementing an offshore wind training program. Funds under this AOI are intended to expand workforce training facilities’ capabilities to provide training and certifications for individuals seeking careers in the offshore wind industry. See FOA 2 for AOI details and requirements. Funding Announcement FY24 Workforce FOA AOI 2 Extended Deadline Application Portal https://form.jotform.com/232823659783166​ Internship Funds are provided under AOI 3 to help offset the costs for organizations working in the offshore wind industry who desire to hire an intern. Internships must  provide interns with offshore wind industry related work experience, training, and/or education necessary for future employment in the industry. The purpose of the Program is to provide individuals with paid opportunities to gain experience in Maryland’s growing offshore wind industry. See FOA 3 for AOI details and requirements. Funding Announcement FY24 Internship FOA AOI 3 Extended Deadline​ Application Portal Area of Interest Funding Availability Industry Education $ 500,000 Workforce Training $ 1,000,000 Internships $ 500,000  ​Contact For questions, suggestions, or more information, please contact the MEA Wind Team via email at wind.mea@maryland.gov or phone at (410) 537-4000. Information submitted to MEA by postal mail may have processing delays and we encourage emails and phone calls when possible. ​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​​​​​​ 

 Follow MEA on social media for updates: 
   ​ Facebook | 
 
      Twitter | 
 ​LinkedIn​ 
      . ​Tell us about your experience with the Maryland Energy Administration. Click here to complete a three question customer experience survey.​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ ​​​As Maryland’s state energy office, the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) will be the recipient of a formulaic Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) award from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).  The State of Maryland’s EECBG award will be for $2,101,450.  DOE will also be providing direct EECBG formulaic allocations to the ten la​rgest counties and ten largest cities and towns in Maryland.  As the ten largest counties and ten largest cities are receiving direct EECBG funding from DOE, MEA’s EECBG allocation will be directed towards counties and incorporated units of local government not receiving direct EECBG grants from DOE.  Applications from state energy offices like MEA were due to DOE on July 31, 2023.  MEA’s EECBG application proposed the following activities:  EECBG funding will provide subgrants on a competitive basis to support  three objectives for county and local government funding recipients: energy planning and strategy development, decarbonization strategy development, and expansion or revisions of existing energy plans and strategies.   EECBG funds will also be used to fund community energy liasons to assist local governments in the development of energy efficiency and decarbonization strategies.   Current status:  DOE has requested that MEA develop detailed project timelines that will enable MEA to ensure that upon approval of MEA’s application by DOE, MEA can have subgrantees identified and grant agreements executed within 180 days as required by the federal law that established the EECBG program (42 U.S.C. 17155(c)(1)).  MEA is currently  determining how the 180 day deadline for subgrantee contracting can be accomplished. If you are interested in getting updates on the EECBG program from MEA, as well as other MEA energy programs, please follow MEA on social media at Facebook | X, forme​rly known as Twitter | L​inkedIn.  Questions about the EECBG program should be directed to federal.mea@maryland.gov. Additional Information from DOE: DOE EECBG Program Formula ​Grant Application Hub We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​Other Clean Buildings Links: ​​ Maryland Clean Energy Center (MCEC) Programs:  We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​Other Clean Buildings Links:​​ ​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. Since its inception through September 2012, EmPOWER Maryland has helped fund measures that will reduce ratepayer energy usage by more than 2 million MWh per year and save $250 million annually. These savings will continue for years, with currently existing measures saving ratepayers $3.7 billion over their useful life. The current legislation sets targets for electric energy and demand reductions through 2015. However, the act also directed MEA, in consultation with the Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC), to determine whether electricity consumption and peak demand reduction targets should be set beyond 2015, and to advise the legislature on the feasibility of setting energy savings targets for natural gas companies. To determine whether electricity and natural gas targets should be extended beyond 2015, MEA will engage relevant stakeholders, including electric and gas utilities and suppliers, the environmental advocacy community, and state agencies. A kickoff meeting was held June 29, 2012 to begin the process. This page will host information and documents related to this effort. Please check back periodically for updates.​​​ Update: April 2017  The new EmPOWER Maryland is a state-level initiative aimed at reducing Maryland’s electricity usage 25 percent by 2020.​ Update: Mar. 18, 2013 MEA has completed the Final Report to the SFC and HEMC on EmPOWER Planning. The report is available here for downloading. MEA hosted a webinar on Mar. 15 to discuss the report's contents and recommendations. The slides from this meeting are now available and the audio from the webinar will be available shortly.  EmPOWER Planning Final Report - Final report to the Senate Finance Committee and House Economic Matters Committee to discuss whether to set EmPOWER Maryland targets beyond 2015. EmPOWER Planning Draft Report - Draft version of the report due to the Senate Finance Committee and House Economic Matters Committee to discuss whether to set EmPOWER Maryland targets beyond 2015. Maryland CHP Market Analysis - Potential study from DOE Mid-Atlantic Clean Energy Application Center discussing the potential market for combined heat and power applications. Maryland Fuel Switching Potential Study - Potential study from GDS, Associates, discussing the potential market for end use fuel switching. Several stakeholders submitted feedback on the Draft Report. Those documents are linked below. MEA has also created a summary of stakeholder comments. This document (also linked below) is MEA's interpretation of the comments, and is provided only for stakeholders convenience. We suggest viewing each author's original comments for a more detailed understanding of stakeholder positions. Stakeholder comments: EmPOWER Maryland Progress to Date and "Business as Usual" ForecastOutlines past performance and a "business as usual" forecast for EmPOWER Maryland programs Natural Gas Energy Efficiency Potential in MarylandReport compiled by GDS Associates, Inc, discussing the potential for natural gas efficiency and conservation programs in Maryland EmPOWER Planning presentationPresentation given by MEA and GDS at the June 29 kickoff meeting. Several stakeholders submitted feedback on the presentation and documents covered during the June 29, 2012 meeting on EmPOWER Planning. Those documents are linked below. MEA has also created a summary of stakeholder comments. This document (also linked below) is MEA's interpretation of the comments, and is provided only for stakeholders' convenience. We suggest viewing each author's original comments for a more detailed understanding of stakeholder positions. Stakeholder comments: We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. Using the form below, you can search by zip code to find out more about what programs you are eligible for to save energy and save money because EmPOWER Maryland makes ¢ent$ for Marylanders State of Maryland agencies like the Maryland Energy Administration and utilites are working together to provide Marylanders with programs that can help lower utility bills and keep money in their pockets. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser.    CFLs use 75% less electricity than incandescents, last up to 10 times longer and can save you up to $65 over the life of the light bulb.   In top-loading washing machines, use cold water to save energy and up to $63 a year. Detergents formulated for cold water get clothes just as clean.   When not in use, unplug your TV. A plasma TV left plugged in costs an estimated $159.76 annually.   Install a low-flow shower head to achieve savings of 25%-60%. Showers use less hot water than baths; also consider taking shorter showers.   When not in use, unplug your laptop. Left plugged in, it costs an estimated $15.90 annually.   Turn down the temperature of your water heater to the warm setting (120 degrees). You'll not only save energy, you'll reduce the risk of scalding.   When not in use, unplug your gaming system. A game console left plugged in costs an estimated $25.73 annually.   Wash only full loads of dishes, air dry and use cold water if possible. If washing dishes by hand, do larger piles at a time and remember not to leave water running in between.   Windows account for 10%-25% of your energy bill. During the summer your air conditioner must work harder to cool hot air from sunny windows. Use curtains or shades to give your air conditioner and energy bill a break.   Ceiling and other fans provide additional cooling and better circulation so you can raise the thermostat and cut down on air conditioning costs.   Pump up your tires; properly inflated tires improves gas mileage by 3%.   You can save up to $115 per year on gasoline costs by reducing your miles driven 5% through biking, taking public transportation, walking or combining trips.   Turning your thermostat back 10%-15% for 8 hours can save as much as 10% on your energy bill. Using a programmable thermostat makes this a user-friendly process.   The average household dedicates 11% of its energy budget to lighting. Turn off lights when not in use. Wasted energy is wasted money.   Set refrigerator temperatures between 37 and 40 degrees (F) and clean coils. Keep the refrigerator full; when the refrigerator is stocked, less cold air is lost when the door is opened.  Download: MoneySavingTipsEmPower.pdf We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​ The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) has compiled a list of county ordinances for wind energy systems with quick links provided below. Alternatively, the US Department of Energy (US DOE) has compiled a similar list of Maryland county ordinances for wind energy systems which can be found 
   here. These ordinances are being provided as a helpful tool and are subject to change. Please be sure to check with your county government when developing a wind project. For questions, suggestions or more information, please contact Samuel Beirne via email at 
   wind.mea@maryland.gov or phone at 410-537-4090. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. Coal is a fossil fuel - a 
                              sedimentary organic rock that contains more than 50 percent carbonaceous 
                              material by weight and is composed largely of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, 
                              nitrogen, and sulfur, with small amounts of other materials ranging from 
                              aluminum to zirconium. Its beginning was in the form of ancient plants that 
                              grew in swamps millions of years ago. Geological processes working over 
                              vast spans of time compressed and altered the plant remains, increasing 
                              the percentage of carbon present and thereby producing various ranks of 
                              coal.​ The four recognized 
                              ranks of coal in the U.S. classification scheme are: anthracite, bituminous 
                              coal, sub-bituminous coal, and lignite. In the United States coal 
                              rank is classified according to its heating value, its fixed carbon and 
                                volatile matter content and, to some extent, its caking characteristics 
                                during combustion. Anthracite: Used primarily for residential and commercial space heating, 
                                anthracite is the highest rank of coal. Its hard, brittle, lustrous 
                                black texture contains a high percentage of fixed carbon and low 
                                percentage of volatile matter. It is often called "hard coal." 
                              Freshly-mined anthracite usually contains less than 15 percent moisture 
                              content. Its typical heat content is 15 million Btu per short ton or 
                              less. Bituminous:Dense coal of black or dark brown color and usually has 
                                well-defined bands of contrasting bright and dull material. It is used 
                                primarily to generate steam electric power. Substantial quantities are 
                                used for power and heat applications in manufacturing as well as to make 
                                coke. In active U.S. mining regions, bituminous coal is the most 
                                abundant coal. It has a a moisture content of less than 20 percent and a 
                                heat content range between 21 to 30 million Btu per ton in a moist, 
                                mineral-matter-free basis. Of the four ranks, bituminous coal accounts 
                                for over half (51 percent) of the demonstrated reserve base. Bituminous 
                                coal is concentrated primarily east of the Mississippi River, with the 
                                greatest amounts in Illinois, Kentucky, and West Virginia. Sub-bituminous: This coal can be dull, dark brown to black in color and soft and 
                                crumbly as one quality, to bright, jet black, hard and strong. Used 
                                primarily as fuel for steam-electric power generation, subbituminous 
                                coal has properties ranging from the properties of lignite or bituminous 
                                coal. The heat content of sub-bituminous coal consumed in the U.S. 
                                ranges from 17 to 18 million Btu per ton on a moist, mineral-matter-free 
                                basis. All sub-bituminous coal (38 percent of the demonstrated reserve 
                                base) is west of the Mississippi, with most of it in Montana and 
                                Wyoming. Lignite: This coal's brownish-black color has a high moisture content and is the 
                                lowest rank coal. It is often called "brown coal" and is used almost 
                                entirely as fuel for steam-electric power generation. It accounts for 
                                slightly less than 10 percent of the demonstrated reserve base and is 
                                found mostly in Montana, Texas, and North Dakota. The United States 
                              contains vast deposits of coal more extensive than those of natural gas 
                              and petroleum, the other major fossil fuels. If total estimated recoverable 
                              reserves of the major fossil fuels are compared on the basis of heat content, 
                              about three percent of reserves are crude oil, about four percent are 
                              natural gas, and over 90 percent are coal. Total U.S. coal resources 
                              in the ground are estimated to be four trillion tons, of which 1.7 trillion 
                              tons are identified resources. Identified resources include the demonstrated 
                              reserve base, which comprises coal resources that have been mapped within 
                              specified levels of reliability and accuracy. They occur in coal beds 
                              meeting minimum criteria of thickness and depth from the surface generally 
                              required for economic mining under current technologies. The U.S. demonstrated 
                              reserve base contains an estimated 470 billion short tons. Because of 
                              property rights, land use conflicts, and physical and environmental restrictions, 
                              some coal in the demonstrated reserve base may not be available and accessible 
                              for mining.​​​​ The actual proportion 
                              of mineable coal resources that can be recovered from undisturbed deposits 
                              varies from less than 40 percent in some underground mines to more than 
                              90 percent at some surface mines. In some underground mines, much of the 
                              coal may be left untouched as pillars needed to prevent surface collapse. 
                              Geologic features, such as folding, faulting, and interlayered rock strata, 
                              can mean a reduction in the amount of coal that can be recovered at both 
                              underground and surface mines. Continuing research 
                              is underway to develop and increase the beneficial uses and products of 
                              coal. Efforts to develop efficient conversion of coal-derived synthesis 
                              gas to clean-burning alcohol fuels and fuel extenders are underway at 
                              the National 
                                Research Center for Coal and Energy (NRCCE) at West Virginia 
                              University. The "energy 
                              park" study to produce a magnitude of fuels and chemical feed stocks 
                              in order to minimize production costs is another focus of the Center. 
                              Producing coal-derived fuels with the enormous abundance of domestic coal 
                              may be helpful in reducing our nation's dependence on foreign petroleum. In 1985, when the 
                              U.S. and Canada saw that their rivers, lakes, forests, and buildings were 
                              being damaged by "acid rain," both countries agreed to a partnership 
                              program for their governments, several U.S. states, and private companies 
                              to develop new, cleaner coal-burning technologies. This "Clean Coal 
                              Technology Program" develops methods to clean coal, to clean the 
                              sulfur from coal's combustion gases (called "scrubbers"), to 
                              find better ways to remove nitrogen oxides ("NOx") from the 
                              flue gases of coal burners, as well as to develop other coal-burning technologies 
                              such as coal gasification. The U.S. Department 
                              of Energy: Coal
                              The U.S. Energy Information 
                              Administration: Coal overview
                              The Maryland Department of the Environment: Coal Mining in Maryland​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. Proved reserves of natural gas are estimated quantities that analyses of geological and engineering data have demonstrated to be economically recoverable in future years from known reservoirs. The natural gas placed by man in underground storage is not included in proved reserves. It is not necessary that production, gathering, or transportation facilities actually be installed or operative for a reservoir to be considered proved. It is assumed that production will be initiated, if and when economically justified. Please go to the U.S. Department of Energy and the Energy Information Administration natural gas websites for complete and detailed information.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. Uranium occurs in nature in combination with small amounts of other elements. Economically recoverable uranium deposits have been discovered principally in the western United States, Australia, Canada, Africa, and South America. A ton of uranium ore mined in the United States yields about seven pounds of Uranium oxide (U308). Uranium ore must be chemically processed, enriched, and formed into pellets before it can be used as a fuel. Uranium fuel pellets are loaded into hollow tubes called fuel rods. Hundreds of fuel rods form fuel assemblies that, along with control rods, are placed into a nuclear reactor core and then submerged in water. Like fossil fuels, the resulting uranium fuel produces heat that turns water into steam. The steam turns blades in a turbine connected to an electrical generator. However, heat is produced differently in a nuclear reactor than in a fossil fuel power plant. The nucleus of an atom consists of combinations of protons and neutrons--each of about equal weight. Energy in a nuclear reactor is derived from a process called nuclear fission in which a neutron strikes the nucleus of a uranium atom and is absorbed. The absorption of the neutron makes the nucleus unstable, causing it to split into two atoms of lighter elements and release heat and new neutrons. The heat is used to produce electricity while the neutrons potentially can be absorbed by other atoms of uranium, resulting in more nuclear fissions. This continuing process of fissioning is called a chain reaction. It is sustained because, for every atom of uranium fissioned by a neutron, new neutrons are released to continue the process. In 1996, nuclear power plants increased throughout the world with 32 countries now using nuclear power to produce electricity. Worldwide, this amounts to 23 percent of the total electric generation in those countries and 17 percent of worldwide electricity generation. Commercial uses of nuclear fuel also became available for the first time from dismantled Russian warheads in 1996. The U.S. connected its last domestic commercial plant, the Watts Bar 1 Plant, in 1996, and five other new nuclear reactors were added worldwide to electric grids bringing the number of commercial nuclear units to 442. Nineteen ninety-six also saw 45 nuclear units already under construction (South Korea and Russia are building seven plants each), and an additional 27 units are in the planning stages throughout the world. China and Japan are scheduling the majority of units to be completed sometime between 2002-2010. Nuclear power is expected to grow annually at 3.4 percent through 2015 in China, India, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, accounting for more than 70 percent of projected new worldwide nuclear power. The Energy Information Administration expects nuclear power to increase worldwide until 2010 and then to fall in 2015 as some U.S. units may close at the end of their current operating license periods.  For information on nuclear power usage in Maryland's power plants, see the Power Plant Research Program of the Maryland Department of Natural Resources.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. The Maryland Energy Administration is actively involved in the litigation activities in the Standard Offer Service Case before Maryland's Public Service Commission. In the Phase I Settlement of that case, MEA was able to negotiate a continuation of standard offer electric service to be provided through Maryland's utilities, and a real time, hourly priced service, in addition to the retail supply services to be offered from the deregulated market. Throughout this case, MEA's representation of Maryland's State agencies has been vital, because the agencies spend millions of dollars annually on the purchase of electricity, and depend on reliable and stable electric service. The Phase I Settlement protects ratepayers from California like price fluctuations during the transition to competition, while encouraging the growth of retail markets in electricity. Additionally, the Settlement includes an MEA sponsored provision to include a green energy component to default service, assuring that standard electric service will be environmentally sound. The Public Service Commission is currently reviewing the Phase II Settlement of the Standard Offer Service case, which addresses the implementation details of default electric service under deregulation. In Phase II, MEA helped draft the model energy suppliers RFP, model utility bid plans, supplier credit mechanisms, and full requirements service agreement. MEA's careful attention to these implementation documents will assure that the goals of Phase I will be realized. The final Settlement will provide Maryland's ratepayers with stable and reliable electric service, while serving to foster a robust competitive market in electricity. For more information on utility restructuring: We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. The Federal Business  Energy Investment Tax Credit allows 30%  tax credit for installed solar energy systems placed in service after December 31, 2019. Clean Energy Production Tax Credit  MEA actively engages with the local solar  industry, e.g. through the MDV-SEIA, to improve  compliance issues, to support target markets, to bring innovative technologies  to Maryland, and to analyze policies that would further develop the solar  market.   Contact us at (410) 537-4000 or 1-800-72-ENERGY or via email at DLInfo_MEA@maryland.gov​  We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ 
  Wind is one of the oldest forms of energy used throughout history. From powering mills to grind grain and wells to pump water, wind energy is now also harnessed to generate electricity. As of June 1, 2017, Maryland has more than 191 MW of installed land-based wind capacity. In 2016, wind energy accounted for 1.4 percent of all instate electricity generation which is enough electricity to power 49,000 average Maryland homes. To support the development of land-based wind energy, the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) offers incentives for residential and community scale wind turbines through the Residential and Community Wind Grant Programs, as well as wind resource site assessment assistance through the Anemometer Loan Program. In addition, MEA has compiled a number of useful technical resources that will help you understand the basics of wind energy and how to get involved.  MEA has funding opportunities available to residents; businesses; non-profit organizations; and state, local, and municipal governments and their institutions to encourage wind energy project development in Maryland. Click on the links below to learn more about these programs. MEA has compiled a number of useful resources that will help you understand the basics of wind energy, deployment of small and community scale wind projects, and how you can plan a career in the wind energy industry. For questions, suggestions or more information, please contact the MEA Wind Team​ via e-mail at 
   wind.mea@maryland.gov. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. According the the Department of Energy, geothermal heat pumps (GHPs), sometimes referred to as GeoExchange, earth-coupled, ground-source, or water-source heat pumps, have been in use since the late 1940s. They use the constant temperature of the earth as the exchange medium instead of the outside air temperature  ​​Geothermal Heating & Cooling (GHC) systems convert stored thermal energy in the earth to heating and cooling for homes and businesses. The systems require use of drilled wells, piping loops, and efficient heat pumps to transfer heat between the wells and a home or business.  GHC systems are the most energy-efficient, environmentally clean, and cost-effective space conditioning systems available, according to the Environmental Protection Agency.1 EPA found that GHC systems can reduce energy consumption by over 40% compared to air source heat pumps, and by over 70% compared to electric resistance heating with standard air-conditioning equipment. EPA also found that GHC systems are 48% more efficient than the best gas furnaces on a source fuel basis, and over 75% more efficient than oil furnaces.​ More information on types of geothermal heat pumps can be found here:http://energy.gov/energysaver/geothermal-heat-pumps In 2012, Maryland became the first state in the country to make the energy generated by GHC technologies eligible for the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) as a Tier 1 renewable source (HB 1186). GHC system owners are also eligible for Renewable Energy Credits (RECs), equivalent to 1 MegaWatt-hour (MWh) of electricity. To qualify for RECs, the GHC technologies must: Take the following steps to register your GHC system with the Maryland Public Service Commission and capture an additional revenue stream: GHC can be a major contributor to goals set by established "green building" standards such as the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), Net Zero Energy Homes and Buildings, and the Living Building Challenge. One elementary school in Richardville, Kentucky leveraged green design with solar PV and GHC to become the nation’s first Net Zero Energy School, which means that the school generates more energy than it consumes over the course of a year.   Meeting 4: Geothermal Workgroup Meeting 4 Agenda Click here to join the meeting Meeting ID: 237 837 689 179
Passcode: vuMst7​   ​   ​According the the Department of Energy, geothermal heat pumps (GHPs), sometimes referred to as GeoExchange, earth-coupled, ground-source, or water-source heat pumps, have been in use since the late 1940s. They use the constant temperature of the earth as the exchange medium instead of the outside air temperature ​​Geothermal Heating & Cooling (GHC) systems convert stored thermal energy in the earth to heating and cooling for homes and businesses. The systems require use of drilled wells, piping loops, and efficient heat pumps to transfer heat between the wells and a home or business. GHC systems are the most energy-efficient, environmentally clean, and cost-effective space conditioning systems available, according to the Environmental Protection Agency.1 EPA found that GHC systems can reduce energy consumption by over 40% compared to air source heat pumps, and by over 70% compared to electric resistance heating with standard air-conditioning equipment. EPA also found that GHC systems are 48% more efficient than the best gas furnaces on a source fuel basis, and over 75% more efficient than oil furnaces.​ More information on types of geothermal heat pumps can be found here:http://energy.gov/energysaver/geothermal-heat-pumps​ ​ In 2012, Maryland became the first state in the country to make the energy generated by GHC technologies eligible for the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) as a Tier 1 renewable source (HB 1186). GHC system owners are also eligible for Renewable Energy Credits (RECs), equivalent to 1 MegaWatt-hour (MWh) of electricity.   To qualify for RECs, the GHC technologies must: Take the following steps to register your GHC system with the Maryland Public Service Commission and capture an additional revenue stream: ​  One elementary school in Richardville, Kentucky leveraged green design with solar PV and GHC to become the nation’s first Net Zero Energy School, which means that the school generates more energy than it consumes over the course of a year. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​ In 2006, US residents, businesses, and institutions produced more than 251 million tons of MSW, which is approximately 4.6 pounds of waste per person per day. Several MSW management practices, such as source reduction, recycling, and composting, prevent or divert materials from the wastestream. Source reduction involves altering the design, manufacture, or use of products and materials to reduce the amount and toxicity of what gets thrown away. Recycling diverts items, such as paper, glass, plastic, and metals, from the wastestream. These materials are sorted, collected, and processed and then manufactured, sold, and bought as new products. Composting decomposes organic waste, such as food scraps and yard trimmings, with microorganisms (mainly bacteria and fungi), producing a humus-like substance.  Other practices address those materials that require disposal. Landfills are engineered areas where waste is placed into the land. Landfills usually have liner systems and other safeguards to prevent groundwater contamination. Combustion is another MSW practice that has helped reduce the amount of landfill space needed. Combustion facilities burn MSW at a high temperature, reducing waste volume and generating electricity. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​ 
 Click on the links below to learn more about these unique opportunities:  MEA has compiled a number of useful resources that will help you understand the basics of wind energy, deployment of small and community scale wind projects, and how you can plan a career in the wind energy industry.   For questions, suggestions or more information, please
contact MEA Wind Program by e-mail at wind.mea@maryland.gov​ or by phone at 410-537-4000.
​​​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​ ​​In accordance with State Government Article, §§10-130—10-139, Annotated Code of Maryland, each State agency that adopts regulations must review those regulations every 8 years, unless exempt under §10-132.1. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the regulations are necessary for the public interest, continue to be supported by statutory authority and judicial opinion, or are appropriate for amendment or repeal. The review is implemented by Executive Order 01.01.2003.20 which also sets the schedule for performing the review. The evaluation report prepared by the responsible agency is also submitted to the Administrative, Executive, and Legislative Review Committee (AELR) of the General Assembly for approval. As a part of this process, MEA is presenting draft changes to COMAR 14.26.02 Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund Programs. This coincides with efforts on the part of MEA to better align program documentation, processes, and terminology to streamline and simplify the grantmaking process and to better serve Marylanders. On December 29, 2023, the proposed Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program regulations were published in the Maryland Register and can be reviewed here. Comments may be sent to Landon Fahrig, Asst. Div. Dir. of Policy, Maryland Energy Administration, 1800 Washington Blvd., Suite 755, Baltimore, MD 21230, or call 410-537-4000, or email to SEIFComments.MEA@Maryland.gov​. Comments will be accepted through January 29, 2024. A public hearing has not been scheduled. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​   EmPOWER programs are managed by the following companies: Baltimore Gas and Electric Company (BGE), Potomac Edison Company (PE), Delmarva Power & Light (Delmarva), Potomac Electric Power Company (PEPCO), Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative, Inc. (SMECO), and Washington Gas Light Company (WGL), with the exception of programs for low-income customers, which the Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) administers. Programs include lighting and appliance rebates for homeowners, Home Performance with ENERGY STAR (including home energy assessments and 50% rebates for energy improvements like insulation and air sealing), commercial lighting rebates, and energy efficiency services for industrial facilities. If you are a residential, commercial, or industrial customer, you can find incentives offered by your utility using the links below.​  
Potomac Edison's Energy Saving Programs While every home is different, the chart below provides a list of energy savings measures that residents can use to achieve significant energy savings. When implemented, these measures can help Marylanders significantly reduce electricity consumption. Click here for detailed explanations of each energy conservation measure We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​ Wondering where to charge your electric vehicle? Want to know the difference between a kilowatt and a kilowatt-hour? Not sure how to choose your own electricity provider? Find the answers to these questions and more in the Maryland Energy Administration's Energy 101. Energy 101 is an energy guide for Maryland. Energy 101 encourages you to explore Energy Basics, browse Consumer Choices, and delve into Energy Policy. There are graphics, links to additional energy information, and source material that provides even more detail on the topics you've learned about here. If you have additional questions, please take a look around the rest of the MEA website, or email us directly at 
   DLinfo_MEA@maryland.gov. A watt is the basic unit of measurement for electricity in an instant. To measure electricity in larger quantities, the following units of measurements are often referenced: The kilowatt-hour is a unit of electricity (kW) that is delivered over time.  The kilowatt hour (kWh) is most commonly known as a billing unit for energy delivered to you by your electricity provider, over the course of your billing cycle.  For example, a heater rated at 1 kilowatt operating for two hours uses two kilowatt-hours of energy.  Using a 60 watt light bulb for one thousand hours consumes 60 kilowatt-hours of electricity. Similarly, one megawatt-hour is 1,000 kilowatts used or delivered in an hour. Megawatt-hours are typically used to describe the energy delivered by a power plant over time. For example, the Calvert Cliffs power plant, when operating at full capacity for one hour, produces 1,735 MWh of electricity that can be used in Maryland.​ In 2008, Marylanders used 63.3 million MWh (or 63.3 billion kWh) of electricity. In general, as more people live and work in Maryland, and as incomes grow, they collectively use more electricity. Marylanders use energy for most of their daily activities. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) says that all energy consumption (electricity, gasoline, natural gas, fuel oil, and propane) in Maryland totaled 1,447 trillion British thermal units (Btus) in 2008, the equivalent of 436 billion kWh. This is approximately 1.5% of all energy consumed in the United States. In Maryland, energy is consumed by four sectors. Transportation consumes the highest share of energy in Maryland, accounting for 31% of the State’s energy use. The commercial sector accounts for 29% of use, residential accounts for 28%, and industrial accounts for 12%.   Of all energy consumed in the United States, about 20% is expended on the heating and cooling, lighting, and appliances in homes. Televisions are increasingly becoming a significant part of the energy use in homes. The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimates that energy consumed through television use – approximately 5.3% of residential electricity use in 2006 - will grow to nearly 7.2% by 2030, making this appliance the most energy consuming product in the home. With accessory equipment such as cable boxes and DVD players, television-related energy use increases to around 10% in homes. This increase comes from: people watching more hours of TV; increased size of the average television screen (people have bigger TVs); and the fact that high-definition digital televisions use more energy than their analog predecessors. In fact, some large flat screen televisions draw as much power as a common refrigerator. Nearly 70% of Maryland’s coal-fired electric generation is produced by power plants that are at least 30 years old.  Of these plants, 22% have been operating for more than 50 years, representing about 12% of the state’s total generation. These plants are so old that when they were built, JFK was president and The Beatles had just played their first show. Of the 81 electric generating plants in Maryland, 31 have been operating for less than 30 years, 11 have been operating between 30-40 years, 21 have been operating 40-50 years, and 18 have been operating for more than 50 years. As Maryland’s medium- and long-term demand increases, new power needs to be developed from a diverse energy portfolio that is clean, renewable, and affordable. To attain those goals, we'll need to make smart, front-end decisions.​ Like driving on highways, electricity can only move around the state on a network of power lines (“transmission” and “distribution”). And, like driving, traffic jams occur from time to time. To reduce electricity congestion and electricity availability, Maryland is considering a number of new transmission projects (the equivalent of adding another lane to a highway). Three of these projects that would impact Maryland are: the Trans Allegheny Interstate Line (TrAIL); the Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline (PATH); and the Mid-Atlantic Power Pathway (MAPP). The Mid-Atlantic region has been designated as a National Interest Electric Transmission Corridor (NIETC). This designation means that additional transmission capacity is so critical that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), under limited conditions, may issue permits for regional transmission line projects that are deemed to be of national interest. In addition to centralized generating stations such as those listed in the question, “Where are power pla​nts located in Maryland?”, distributed generation is becoming more widespread. Distributed generation generally refers to consumers creating their own electricity at or near the point of consumption, avoiding transmission and distribution of the energy and avoiding purchasing electricity from the  utility. This power is generally used to satisfy on-site electricity needs, such as for a house or a small office building. Distributed generation technologies include combustion engines, small wind, solar, small hydroelectric, and fuel cells. They can be used to take the place of electricity from the grid during times of peak demand or to reduce reliance on a local utility. Electricity moves from the power plant to your home through a series of high-voltage power lines called the “electric grid.” “Electric generation” refers to the power plants creating the electricity from resources such as coal, wind, and the sun. “Electric distribution” refers to the power lines connecting your home to the power plant. Detailed coordination and planning of the transmission system is critical to maintaining electricity reliability and the ability to provide needed power supplies at reasonable prices. The map below shows the extent of Maryland’s existing transmission network. The further the electricity must travel, the higher the voltage of the transmission line. As the power reaches your house, the electric companies lower the voltage to a “distribution” level, to make the power usable in your television, computer, and other items needing electricity. In this map, “kV” means “kilovolt” or 1000 volts of electricity. A volt is a unit of measurement analogous to the measurement of the pressure difference which creates water flow – the voltage, or “pressure difference,” determines how quickly electrons will travel through the circuit. The higher the voltage, the faster the electricity can move and the more efficiently it will move between points. But electricity moving at higher speeds is not usable for items like televisions, computers, and kitchen appliances. That’s why high voltage transmission lines send electricity large distances, and low voltage lines are used to deliver power to your house.   Source: Maryland Power Plants and the Environment: A review of the impacts of power plants and transmission lines on Maryland’s natural resources (CEIR-15) PJM controls and coordinates the delivery of power throughout the region. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) regulates PJM, which determines the flow of power (“dispatching”) across the District of Columbia and all or parts of 13 states: Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan. PJM consolidates transmission needs into a single coordinated plan to ensure everyone has access to power. PJM creates 5-year plans to undertake transmission system upgrades, as well as a 15-year plan for upgrades to high-voltage circuits (i.e., 230 kV and above). The following map illustrates proposed transmission system upgrades in Maryland.   Source: Maryland Power Plants and the Environment: A review of the impacts of power plants and transmission lines on Maryland’s natural resources (CEIR-15) Generation costs are generally dependent upon how much it costs an operator to run the power plant. The main areas of generation cost include the fuel, maintenance, and the cost to pay for construction of the plant itself. In the case of renewable fuel resources, the cost of fuel is zero, and this factor is balanced with the capital cost of construction. Transmission and distribution congestion, like a traffic jam along the highway, describes a situation in which lower cost power cannot reach its intended market because the transmission system is not able to carry the electricity. Typically occurring during periods of high demand (like hot summers when people are using their air conditioners), congestion results from a constraint along the transmission line. This transmission congestion can have a significant impact on location-specific prices of electricity in the wholesale (bulk) markets. Generators selling electricity in a zone with transmission congestion may be able to obtain higher prices than a generator with comparable operating costs located in a zone that is not subject to transmission congestion. Price differentials within the PJM regions are mainly due to congestion between the Western Region (Ohio), where abundant low-cost generation is located, and the Mid-Atlantic Region (Maryland), where the population is higher (requiring more electricity) and generation is comparatively less. PJM estimates that congestion added approximately $57.7 million in costs for BGE in 2007 and $66.6 million for Delmarva Power in that same year. To reduce congestion and improve system reliability (reduce blackouts and loss of power), a number of new transmission projects are being proposed, three of which would affect Maryland: the Trans Atlantic Interstate Line (TrAIL), the Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline (PATH), and the Mid-Atlantic Power Pathway (MAPP). These projects are discussed in more detail in the question "How does electricity reach my home?". The electricity industry is separated into three independent businesses: 1) generation and supply (creating the electricity), 2) transmission (moving the electricity long distances, and 3) distribution (delivering the electricity to your house). Customers are billed for each of the three separate functions, although most customers just receive one consolidated electric bill. For a more comprehensive breakdown of your bill, visit your power company’s website to see how you pay for each of these pieces: Of all energy consumed in the United States, about 20% is expended on the heating and cooling, lighting, and appliances in homes. You can easily reduce your electric bill with simple changes to your energy use. To discover easy ways to reduce your electric bill, read MEA’s Residential Energy Saving Tips and learn 15 things that will empower you to save money. For example, most energy used in your house is for heating and cooling. An easy way to save money is to make your home more energy efficient. Install efficient windows and weather stripping, and lower your thermostat in the winter and raise it in the summer – these are all easy ways to save money by using less electricity for heating and cooling. By conducting a home energy assessment, you can find all the places where your home can be more energy efficient. For information about conducting a home energy assessment, read MEA’s Energy Assessment suggestions or visit the Maryland Home Performance with ENERGY STAR website.​ In these difficult economic times, an increasing number of Marylanders have found they need help with their utility bills. Whether it is the right information or financial assistance, there are resources available to you. As a low-income customer, you may qualify for assistance from the Maryland Energy Assistance Program (MEAP) and the Electric Universal Service Program (EUSP) for your utility bills. Visit the Maryland Office of the People’s Counsel website for consumer rights fact sheets, energy assistance applications, weatherization assistance program information and more. You can also call People’s Counsel at 1-800-207-4055. Another resource is the Maryland Department of Human Resources’ Maryland Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) at or 1-800-352-1446. ​ Yes. Since the deregulation of the energy market in Maryland in 1999, Maryland residents have been able to  choose who provides their gas and electricity. You may choose to buy electricity or gas from your local utility (like BGE or Pepco) or from an alternative energy supplier. A gas or electricity supplier may offer lower prices than your local utility, or may offer you options for electricity from renewable energy, such as wind or solar energy. All gas and electricity suppliers must be approved by the Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC) and comply with the PSC’s rules on marketing, solicitation, contracting, and all Maryland consumer protection laws. Energy suppliers compete with your local utility to sell you electricity and/or natural gas. Suppliers sell directly to consumers, using the local utility’s distribution system (the power lines or natural gas pipes). You pay the local utility for the delivery service, and the supplier for the electricity or gas. Most often you will receive only one bill from the utility listing the prices of the distribution and generation separately. You do not have to choose a new supplier. If you do not, then by default you will receive your electricity or gas supply from your local utility. If you do choose an energy supplier, the following still applies: Websites and direct mail information from energy companies do not always make clear whether they are energy suppliers, energy brokers (a company that sells and trades energy in the wholesale marketplace but not directly to you as a user), or aggregators (a broker that acts on behalf of a group of customers, or multiple customers such as a homeowners association). There are important differences and you will always need to have a contract with an energy supplier if you do not purchase your electric or gas from your local utility. See the Maryland Office of the People’s Counsel (OPC) for a detailed description: What are Energy Suppliers, Brokers, Aggregators? The OPC has a guide on Contracting for Electricity and Natural Gas Supply and pricing information for Electric Suppliers and Natural Gas Suppliers. It may be helpful to review the Guide and OPC’s price comparison information, and check with the Maryland PSC about licensed suppliers, before you make any decisions on contracting with a supplier.​ Yes. Some energy suppliers specialize in renewable energy contracts, and some offer a blend of renewable and non-renewable energy sources, depending on your needs. The OPC has a guide on Contracting for Electricity and Natural Gas Supply and pricing information for Electric Suppliers and Natural Gas Suppliers. It may be helpful to review the Guide and OPC’s price comparison information, and check with the Maryland PSC about licensed suppliers, before you make any decisions on contracting with a supplier.​ Yes. You can generate renewable energy at your home by installing energy generating equipment like solar cells, small wind turbines, and geothermal technology. Businesses, government entities and industrial companies can also generate their own renewable energy.​ Yes. To encourage the growth of renewable energy in Maryland, the Maryland Energy Administration offers grants towards the purchase and installation of wind, solar, and geothermal systems. For a list of available grants, visit the MEA residential, business, state & local, or transportation webpages. Some examples of residential grants offered by MEA include: The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) website is a great resource for Maryland residents to find information and incentives that increase energy efficiency and renewable energy production across the State. The website is also an informational tool for non-Maryland residents to discover ways to make improvements on their own and join Maryland as it continues to lead by example on energy programs and goals. You can also contact MEA by email at DLinfo_MEA@maryland.gov​ or by phone at 410-260-7655 or 800-72-ENERGY. Another resource is DSIREUSA.org. DSIRE is a comprehensive source of information on state, local, utility and federal incentives and policies that promote renewable energy and energy efficiency. DSIRE was established in 1995 and is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy.​ Information on how to apply to MEA’s Clean Energy Grant Program is located on our website based on the consumer category: To apply for a Clean Energy Grant, you or your selected contractor should fill out an application form and the supporting documents. These forms are sent to MEA as part of a complete application package. MEA reviews each application for completeness and accuracy. Incomplete or incorrect applications will be returned to you for correction. It is necessary that all requested information is supplied to avoid delays. MEA will notify you after we receive your completed application. If there is a waiting list, your application will be automatically placed on the waiting list in the order it was approved. Once it is your turn to receive grant funds, you will receive a Grant Commitment Letter. This letter details the award information and effectively reserves your funding. Once you receive the Grant Commitment Letter, you can then install your project. After installation, you and your installer should send in the completion package, which consists of the Completion Certificate and the requested items of supporting documentation. MEA will review the completion package for completeness and accuracy. If any information is missing or incorrect, the package will be returned without being processed. When the application is deemed complete, the information is sent to the Governor’s Finance Office to process payment to the applicant.​ The number of contractors specializing in residential renewable energy system installations has grown to more than 300 in Maryland. MEA does not endorse or approve any specific contractors, but there are resources and associations you can use to find local contractors to install your renewable energy system. After MEA has received and accepted all required final grant documentation based on an installed system, grant payment is typically processed in 6-8 weeks. The entire process includes the initial application and review period, the length of which depends on the length of the waitlist. Upon application approval, the applicant has 180 days to finish the installation and submit to MEA all required documentation to receive the grant, which is typically processed in 6-8 weeks. You can find the instructions for application on the Residential Clean Energy Rebate Program​​ web page.​ Yes. Local ordinances define what structures can be installed on properties. Visit the MEA website to find a list of Counties with Wind Ordinances. If you are an incorporated municipality, please check with your local planning and zoning office.​ On the MEA transportation webpage, you will find information about alternative fuel and electric vehicles in Maryland. Once there, it’s easy to find lists of biofuel fueling stations, ethanol (E85) fueling stations, and natural gas fueling (CNG) stations. In addition, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) maintains an interactive map giving information and directions to biodiesel (B20 and above), compressed natural gas, electric, ethanol, hydrogen, liquefied natural gas (LNG) and liquefied petroleum gas (propane) fueling stations. To view the map, visit DOE’s Alternative Fuels & Advanced Vehicles Data Center.​ The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) helps provide Marylanders with reliable, affordable clean energy. MEA provides funding and resources that help Marylanders save money while making smart energy-saving choices. We help Maryland save money and energy by assisting residents, businesses, and State and local governments reduce their statewide electricity demand. By promoting, encouraging and financially supporting the use of renewable energy and energy efficiency activities, we help decrease the amount of electricity that residents pay for, and increase the amount of clean, renewable energy deployed throughout the state. MEA also helps citizens, businesses, and governmental entities include renewable energy sources into homes and businesses across the State. The State’s goal is to generate 25% of its energy from clean, renewable sources like wind and solar, by 2020 is being realized throughout Maryland. Since 2006, the amount of solar PV systems installed in Maryland has increased 140 times over. MEA programs and grants help offset the upfront cost of installing solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, and other renewable energy systems. Under the EmPOWER Maryland initiative, the State of Maryland set a goal to reduce energy use by 15% by the year 2015. Enacted in 2008, EmPOWER Maryland created energy efficiency programs that are offered through the state’s five largest electric utilities. The program helps homeowners and businesses save energy, partly by offering incentives and technical assistance for adding insulation, sealing air leaks, and installing more efficient appliances. It also facilitates efficient commercial lighting and other improvements at industrial facilities. The majority of the EmPOWER Maryland programs offered previously will continue beyond 2015, and the utilities and stakeholders are currently investigating new program offerings. As part of their EmPOWER Maryland portfolios, Maryland’s five largest electric utilities offer many programs to save your home or business energy and money. Programs include lighting and appliance rebates, HVAC, Home Performance with Energy Star, Energy Star New Homes, combined heat and power, and other efficiency services and/or measures for homes, businesses and industrial facilities. The Maryland Energy Administration encourages residents to adopt the combination of energy savings measures that are most appropriate for their homes. In many cases, these measures do not require a large financial investment, and grants, rebates, and tax credits are available. For more information on how to save money at your home, see  “What can I do to reduce my monthly electricity bill?” For more information, visit the MEA EmPower Maryland page. As of 2010, there were more than 600 renewable energy facilities in Maryland supplying more than 700 MW of electricity. This represents approximately 5% of Maryland’s electricity coming from renewable sources. This is up from 24 facilities in 2006. (Source: Power Plant Research Project, 2010 Inventory of Renewable Energy Generators Eligible for the Maryland Renewable Portfolio Standard.) The effort to increase the use of clean renewable energy for the state creates green jobs and encourages a growing economy. Maryland currently offers incentives for private citizens, businesses, and industries to take advantage of solar, wind, biomass, landfill methane, geothermal, ocean, fuel cell, and hydropower resources. They include: To further encourage renewable energy generation in Maryland, in 2008 Maryland enacted Renewable Portfolio Standard legislation, requiring Maryland electric suppliers to provide their customers with a gradually increasing portion of their electricity from renewable energy. This obligation is met through “Renewable Energy Credits,” or RECs (the tool that represents 1 MWh of renewable energy produced, like a stock certificate representing one share of stock in a company), or through alternative compliance payments (ACPs) credited into the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) to support renewable energy projects in Maryland. Utilities must pay the ACP if they do not meet the renewable energy goals required by state law. In 2010, the State of Maryland chose to lead by example in the execution of its renewable energy policy. Together, MEA, the Maryland Department of General Services, and the University of Maryland collectively launched the Generating Clean Horizons initiative to increase the amount of installed clean energy in Maryland. In Generating Clean Horizons, Maryland committed to buy a certain amount of its own electricity needs at state facilities from renewable sources to meet the needs of state offices. Maryland government facilities purchase clean energy generated in Maryland at competitive prices, offered through contracts by private industry. This arrangement offers renewable energy developers the certainty needed to finance these new projects, which directly results in new jobs and tax revenue for all of Maryland.​ Maryland’s clean energy goal is to generate 20% of its electricity from clean, renewable sources by 2022. In 2008, Maryland put its clean energy goals into law through the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS). There are several ways the State can achieve this goal. This includes generating at least 2% of its electricity directly from solar energy. Maryland also looks to other renewable energy sources as well, including existing biomass resources (such as forestry waste, agricultural crops, municipal waste, and poultry litter) and the development of onshore wind projects. In 2010, the State of Maryland chose to lead by example in the execution of its renewable energy policy. Together, MEA, the Maryland Department of General Services, and the University of Maryland collectively launched the Generating Clean Horizons initiative to increase the amount of installed clean energy in Maryland. In Generating Clean Horizons, Maryland committed to buy a certain amount of its own electricity needs at state facilities from renewable sources to meet the needs of state offices. Maryland government facilities purchase clean energy generated in Maryland at competitive prices, offered through contracts by private industry. This arrangement offers renewable energy developers the certainty needed to finance these new projects, which directly results in new jobs and tax revenue for all of Maryland.  The Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) is a policy goal that specifies that 20% of the electricity sold in Maryland must come from renewable resources by the year 2022. At least 2% of the electricity must come from solar resources that are located in Maryland. The remaining 18% can come from other renewable technologies such as wind, biomass, landfill gas, anaerobic digestion, and other approved technologies located in the wider PJM region. Annual RPS requirements increase each year until the 20% requirement is reached in 2022. The RPS is designed to provide a market incentive encouraging new renewable energy construction. RPS compliance is provided through a mechanism of Renewable Energy Credits (RECs). RECs represent 1,000 kWh of renewable energy generation. Each energy supplier serving Maryland consumers must purchase enough RECs to satisfy their RPS requirement. If an energy supplier does not purchase enough RECs, they must pay a penalty called an Alternative Compliance Payment. The penalty is routed back to MEA to use for additional clean energy grants. The RPS is important as it encourages the generation of clean, non-polluting energy. It also makes Maryland’s electric supply more dependable because the resources are distributed. This eases congestion on the electricity distribution network and can increase the grid’s reliability in extreme weather conditions. For more about the distribution of electricity, see the question, "How does electricity reach my home?" For more information on the RPS, visit the Public Service Commission’s Annual RPS Reports.​ There is a fundamental difference in how renewable energy systems produce electricity and how homeowners consume it. Solar panels don’t produce electricity at night, and wind systems produce the most electricity during the winter months. Because homeowners don’t consume electricity in the same patterns, it is unlikely that the system production and homeowner consumption will exactly match what is produced at a particular time. Net metering allows a customer with their own distributed generation renewable energy system to offset their energy production against their energy consumption over a period of time (typically a year). When net metering is used, utilities must install electric meters that can move in two directions. Typically, your meter only spins in one direction, forward, to reflect your home’s use of electricity. In net metering, the meter spins forward when you are using more energy than your system is producing (such as at night), and spins backwards when producing more electricity than you are using (such as during cool spring days or when no one is home). The local utility allows the generation and consumption to “net” against each other for a defined period, and the customer only pays for the net amount used. For example, if over the course of a month a homeowner consumes 1,000 kWh, and their renewable energy system produces 800 kWh, they will only be billed for the 200 kWh difference. If the homeowner produces more energy than they use, they can roll the kWh credit forward for up to 12 months to offset future consumption. More information on net metering can be found on your local utility’s website. Search for the term "Net Meter" or "Net Metering."​ MEA’s clean energy grant programs are funded through several different sources, including the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF), and from Alternative Compliance Payments contributed by electricity generators that do not meet the RPS.​ Maryland Energy Administration. Maryland Energy Outlook, Jan. 2010. Retrieved Dec. 2010 from http://www.energy.state.md.us/documents/MEOFINALREPORTJAN2010.pdf Maryland Office of the People’s Counsel. Consumer Corner. Retrieved Nov. 2010 from http://www.opc.state.md.us/opc/ConsumerCorner.aspx Maryland Power Plant Research Program. Electricity in Maryland – Fact Book 2008. Retrieved Nov. 2010 from http://esm.versar.com/pprp/factbook/factbook.htm Maryland Power Plant Research Program. Maryland Power Plants and the Environment: A review of the impacts of power plants and transmission lines on Maryland’s natural resources (CEIR-15). https://dnr.maryland.gov/pprp/Documents/CEIR-19-Full%20Document.pdf​​ U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Maryland State Energy Profile. Retrieved from http://www.eia.doe.gov/state/state-energy-profiles.cfm?sid=MD.​ We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. The Federal Business  Energy Investment Tax Credit allows 30%  tax credit for installed solar energy systems placed in service after December 31, 2019. Clean Energy Production Tax Credit  MEA actively engages with the local solar  industry, e.g. through the MDV-SEIA, to improve  compliance issues, to support target markets, to bring innovative technologies  to Maryland, and to analyze policies that would further develop the solar  market.   Contact us at (410) 537-4000 or 1-800-72-ENERGY or via email at DLInfo_MEA@maryland.gov​  We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​​​​​  ​ For more information, contact MEA regarding the Resiliency Hub Grant Program by email at david.comis@maryland.gov or by phone at 410-537-4064 to speak with David Comis, the MEA program manager.​Follow MEA on social media for updates:  Facebook I  Twitter I  Linkedin 
   We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​​ ​ This program in is not active, information below is for historical information only. For information about current MEA wind programs, visit the Maryland Offshore Wind Supply Chain Investment Program and the Maryland Offshore Wind Workforce Training & Education Program webpages. The Community Wind Grant Program (CWGP) provides grants to encourage the development of community scale wind projects in Maryland. The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) defines a community wind project as “a distributed wind energy project that benefits a local community.”  The program is open to businesses, non-profits, and State, Local, and Municipal governments and their agencies/institutions on a first come, first served basis. Projects that are either purchased or owned by a third party are eligible for the Community Wind Grant Program. In fiscal year 2019 (July 1, 2018 to June 30, 2019), the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) has a combined budget of up to $1 million available for the Residential and Community Wind Grant Programs. All Wind grants are subject to funding availability. Applicants must follow all instructions and satisfy all requirements throughout the application process as specified in the dropdown menu(s) below and on application forms. MEA will not accept applications for the FY 2019 Community Wind Grant Program after May 1, 2019 at 11:59 PM EST. MEA will not offer the Community Wind Grant Program in FY 2020 and any future fiscal year thereafter. The Program utilizes a tiered approach, with smaller systems receiving a higher kW capacity incentive than larger systems. Grant awards range in size from $500/kW to $4000/kW per project based on system size (review incentive table below) and are awarded on a first come, first serve basis, up to available funding levels.  Community wind grants cannot exceed the lessor of 50 percent of net cost of installation or the dollar amount cap as specified in the incentive table below. Net cost is calculated as the installation cost reduced by other incentives such as grants or tax credits provided by Federal, State, County, or Local governments. Wind turbines eligible under Tier 1 (nameplate capacity between 1 – 25 kW) have additional requirements and special conditions as discussed in further detail in the ‘Requirements’ section below.      *Tier 1 is designed to match the Residential Wind Grant Program incentive and requirement structure. As shown in the Community Wind Grant (FY 2019) incentive chart, the incentive levels are broken into tiers based on capacity. The Community Wind Tier 1 incentive is designed to match the Residential Wind Grant Program incentive and requirement structure. The following conditions are exclusive to eligible systems in Tier 1.  Please be sure to review and follow all program documents, instructions, and requirements before submitting a Community Wind Grant Application to MEA. Grant applications must include a Primary Point of Contact (PPC). The PPC is responsible for ensuring grant documentation is submitted in a timely, accurate, and complete manner. The Community Wind Grant Program offers Applicants the option to complete a one-step application process for projects constructed within the last twelve (12) months or a two-step application process for projects that need a definitive grant funding commitment before project construction.       Please download the Application Form, complete it according to the provided instructions, and mail it to: Maryland Energy Administration Attn: Wind Programs 1800 Washington Blvd, Suite 755 Baltimore, MD 21230       MEA has compiled a number of useful resources that will help you understand the basics of wind energy, deployment of small and community scale wind projects, and how you can plan a career in the wind energy industry.     For questions, suggestions or more information, please contact the MEA Wind Team​ via e-mail at wind.mea@maryland.gov. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. ​​ ​ This grant is no longer active, information on this page is for historical reference​​​​ only. For information on our current wind energy grants, visit the Maryland Offshore Wind Supply Chain Investment Program and the Maryland Offshore Wind Workforce Training & Education Program webpages.   ​Please be sure to review and follow all program documents, instructions, and requirements before submitting a Residential Wind Grant Application to MEA. Please note the Residential Wind Grant Program only provides awards for projects after the wind project installation has been completed. If you wish to check on the availability of grant funds prior to installing a residential wind energy system, please contact Samuel Beirne via email at wind.mea@maryland.gov or by phone at 410-537-4090.  Maryland Energy AdministrationAttn: Residential Wind Grant Program1800 Washington Blvd., Suite 755Baltimore, MD 21230​ ​MEA has compiled a number of useful resources that will help you understand the basics of wind energy, deployment of small and community scale wind projects, and how you can plan a career in the wind energy industry. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. For questions, suggestions or more information, please contact the MEA Wind Team via e-mail at wind.mea@maryland.gov. We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser.  MEA High Resolution Geophysical Resource Survey 2013 (Appendix Metadata Available Upon Request) Offshore Wind Resource Assessment Seafloor Classification of Area Adjacent to Maryland Wind Energy Area.pdf  Analysis of Maryland Port Facilities for Offshore Wind Energy Services  Analysis of Maryland Steel Facilities for Sufficiency to Support Offshore Wind Energy Deployment  Maryland Offshore Wind: Port Assessment – Operations, Maintenance, and Service ​​ Marine Mammal and Sea Turtle Sightings in the Vicinity of the Maryland Wind Energy Area (Data and Metadata Available Here​)      We're available on the following channels.

JavaScript is required to use content on this page. Please enable JavaScript in your browser. The Maryand Energy Administration (MEA) has compiled a number of useful maps depicting United State and Maryland wind energy resources, potential wind capacity, installed wind capacity, and federal offshore wind lease areas. Also included are several interactive regional ocean planning data portals. (Source: Bureau of Ocean Energy Management) For questions, suggestions or more information, please contact Samuel Beirne via email at 
   wind.mea@maryland.gov or phone at 410-537-4090.   We're available on the following channels.

